[Music]
hello welcome to today's explore online
event my name is Maya and I'm a student
studying here at Oxford I study Spanish
and linguistics at Saint Anne's and I
also have a YouTube channel where I
discuss my experience here at Oxford so
today we're going to be discussing
languages and you can enter the prize
draw and the details of that will scroll
across the bottom of your screen you can
enter via the chat window and via
Instagram and Twitter as well and you
can also email until 11:00 a.m. tomorrow
it would be great if you could send us
your best questions on would it be
better if we all spoke the same language
some will answer today and some all
available all eligible for the draw and
make sure you send us your school as
well so today's question is would it be
better if we all spoke the same language
[Music]
watching this animation shows us that
it's not a very simple question to
answer
so today we've got some experts from the
University of Oxford could you all
introduce yourselves please
so I'm Katherine Cole and a professor of
German
I am currently running a program called
and search program called creative
multilingualism which includes a huge
number of languages so I've spent much
of my life just moving between English
and German because I grew up in Germany
but with an English mum
and I've done a lot of research then in
German I've taught German I've also
taught some English in Spain but now
since 2000 2016 I've been running this
program where what we're trying to find
out about is how languages connect with
creativity and we're looking at all
sorts of different aspects of that and
there are 21 researchers working on the
program who are from linguistics from
different languages there's about 40
languages between us and there are some
biology there's a biologist from
anthropology from English and from many
different languages that I also then go
beyond European languages and so as for
instance is one of our consortium
members and they teach and a huge range
of languages across many different parts
of the world and so this question of how
languages and linguist and creativity
interact is one that we're researching
across the spectrum of what language
really consists of from the cognitive
through to text through performance and
language learning I'm Tom Crawford
I am a Massachusetts news college here
in Oxford and I will
so and part of the outreach team at San
John's College so I am here to represent
maths and science in this debate and to
try and give a different perspective on
what language is and to sort of question
how we actually define a language so I
have studied I didn't undergraduate
undergraduate degree in maths here
Oxford I then did my PhD in applied
maths at Cambridge as I said I now teach
back in Oxford so maths is my passion
and when I'm not teaching I do lots of
public engagement and outreach events
trying to get everyone to love maths as
much as I do
and also to convince them that maths is
a language hello my name is Mariana
Bolognese and I work with Katherine and
they created multilingualism program I
am Italian as you can guess from my name
Mariano Bolognese actually it was I grew
up in Italy even though I was born in
the States near Chicago but from Italian
parents you probably could also hear
that I have a strong Italian accent I
hope it's nonetheless clear and and yeah
so I work with Katrine on the creative
multilingualism program and my focus is
on metaphors which are as you may know
the metaphors are can be summarized as
something is something else and as
humans we tend to use metaphors all the
time and that's that's I think it's it's
a incredible and powerful tool that we
have in our communication system because
it breaks all the rules so with a
metaphor we can say we can break the
basic logic rule that a table is a table
or you are you a chair is a chair with a
metaphor we can say that a table is
something else you are something else so
we break the identity rule and we
construct new identities great thank you
so much for joining us so you can send
your questions to the experts via email
or via social media or also very much
make sure you also put your school names
there as well so we're going to start
off with an introductory question what
is language because you all give me your
answers so if we take that at perhaps
the most general level that we tend to
think of a language as so people learn
languages at school that in the UK that
might be say French Spanish German or it
might be languages that they speak at
home which you can then also do a
qualification in so you might be doing a
qualification in Polish or Swahili so
these are languages that are spoken by
particular groups cultural groups might
be nations and how we define them
depends a lot on how these groups define
themselves politically so you very
quickly get into all sorts of different
complexities but then you also have the
question of what what distinguishes one
language from another and in linguistics
sometimes people really just thought
talk about different varieties because
the boundaries are very fluid so is what
people talk in Scotland is that a
different language from what people talk
in Cornwall or is it a different dialect
of the same language people can get into
quite deep water discussing these
questions and in a quest in a country
like or for instance Nigeria has 600
different languages some people say I
was a very cool conference in Senegal
looking at language and development and
in Senegal the main language they speak
there is Wolof which I didn't even know
existed before I went there but they
also speak French as a kind of lingua
franca that unites them also with people
speaking other languages in Africa and
in other parts of the world and they
also increasingly speaking English and
then with in Senegal there are many many
different languages and often from one
village to the next the language differs
perhaps as a dialect perhaps as a
language so what is a language becomes a
very different quite difficult question
to answer
I'm gonna take a complete step back and
say that from a very basic scientific
point of view I think a language is a
way of communicating information so it's
taking something that you know and you
want to pass on to somebody else and so
in that instance something like a
chemical formula
perhaps that you've learnt in chemistry
say that the formula for methane ch4
that is a that is a language that is a
way of passing on an MP sub information
to somebody else when they read that
statement they don't understand what
that means
and similarly in maths you could have
equations which will pass on information
and not only in master particular
they're not only passing on information
it's also done in a very neat and
concise manner so for example you could
have Pythagoras theorem so you have a
right-angled triangle you have three
different sides a and B which join at a
right angle and then C which is your
diagonal Pythagoras is there and will
tell you as hopefully you've learned to
school a squared plus B squared equals C
squared it's a very neat equation it's
really easy to remember it's the ribbon
drilled into my head from back in the
track of the day at school I feel like
I'll never forget it but if you try and
explain that same bit of information in
a sentence you're sort of saying well
you have a triangle and then if you
square the length of the bottom side and
you square the length of the side that
joins it at a right angle and then add
them then that's equal to the square of
the third side and it just becomes very
confusing and quite difficult to convey
that information so I think you know
that the sort of the maths behind it
it's very clear very concise and it's
universally understood so the statement
a squared plus B squared equals C
squared is understood in every country
around the world so for me a language is
a way of just getting across information
interesting well I agree that a language
in principle is a system of symbols that
we use
to convey meaning to express something
to convey meaning I think there is a
crucial difference between what are
called in linguistics human languages or
natural languages and other types of
languages and human languages as Catrin
was saying I think they have more they
are definitely more complex
sophisticated and rich because good luck
talking with just formulas you know with
with a human language with a natural
language I think we can convey much more
a richer and deeper nuance of meanings
and definitely human languages have are
backed up by human cultures and that is
something that probably doesn't back up
a math language for other types of
languages great so it's great to have a
variety of opinions from all of you so
we're going to start with a few
questions now so Katrina what is the
point of speaking more than one language
right so I suppose it depends on what
you're well perhaps to some extent where
you live so what became very clear to me
when I was in Africa was something I
knew theoretically but hadn't really
quite experienced in this same way that
people speak different languages for
different purposes and with different
groups and if they travel even quite
small distances they need to be able to
operate in different linguistic mediums
so in India for instance it can be very
you might need five languages to be able
to operate in daily life because
different people you speak to in
different parts of society will be
speaking different languages and people
seem to negotiate that really
extraordinarily successfully so if
you're if you live there you need to
learn all those languages because
otherwise you simply can't function
in a day-to-day context if we're in the
UK it might seem that we can get by with
just one language but actually even when
we're talking to different types of
people or we might talk we talked our
dog or our grandmother we are actually
constantly moving between different
kinds of language and so we're adapting
how we speak and what we say and the
language we use the vocabulary we use
so in some sense we're all linguists
already and right from birth if we're if
there's a question of learning other
languages that we don't speak at all
then that becomes actually a very useful
thing to do because it means that we
become more able to adapt we become more
able to learn other languages more
quickly and in order to communicate for
example in business it's often said that
if somebody wants to sell you something
they will talk to you in your language
so if we're in the UK and people want to
sell us stuff they will talk to us in
English but if we want to sell something
to them then they might not be wanting
to respond to us so well if we just say
oh well you know I speak English and
they say okay fine but you sell it to me
in the language that I understand and
that's going to persuade me so sort of
emotional language and means of
persuasion come into it at that point so
it's a it's a very kind of important
skill to have to be able to respond to
other people in their language and I
think it's an absolutely essential skill
really that we should all be wanting to
learn and it's also fascinating to learn
about because we understand more about
how communication works in more general
terms that's great understanding sort of
different dialects between different
people and you speak to people in
different ways using different language
really so I have a question for you Tom
is there a universal universal language
in maths or science
there absolutely is and I would say I
think it's a universal language of the
whole universe is Matt's because if you
sort of again it's I think my argument
here is sort of taking a step back from
just earth and thinking about the whole
universe and you can for example think
about the the scientific theories that
we have to understand the world around
us sort of the the key ones you have say
Newton's law of gravity sort of one of
the most fundamental pieces of physics
that you will learn around school you
know the fact that our Earth orbits the
Sun because of gravity this force the
fact that we stay on the surface of the
earth and it float off because of
gravity but that whole theory is
expressed in a very simple and concise
mathematical equation that says that
force equals some constant times mass 1
times mass 2 divided by the distance
squared where the mass 1 of mass 2 are
the mass of the two objects and the
distance squared on the bottom is the
distance between those two objects
squared so it's a very nice simple
concise equation that communicates a
whole understanding of the universe so
from that equation you get that the
earth goes around the Sun in an ellipse
you get that we stay on the surface of
the earth but when you're in space and
the space station you float that all
comes from that simple equation so that
is sort of you know writing things in
maths is a way of expressing these
universal concepts in in a language and
a scientific language and then you can
also think about it in terms of more
modern sort of technology in the way our
society today relies so much on
computers and technology and our phones
and everything else that's sort of
coding and programming languages that
all of this stuff is written in it's
it's in the name it's called a
programming language though when you're
writing code you can learn Python C++
JavaScript there's all different coding
things you can learn and they are
actually called programming languages
because each one is conveying
information using maths using numbers
using symbols using operators but that
is a language
there so I think ultimately I would say
maths is the language of science and the
language of the universe in my opinion
mmm and you know and then from that you
sort of get equations you get
programming languages you get chemical
formulas but they all stem from sort of
maths at the core great it's lovely to
have a different perspective on what we
normally consider languages don't forget
to send all of your questions to us so
Mariana our people who can speak more
than one language smarter that's a very
tricky question and it depends on how
you define smartness like what does it
mean being smart you know and I don't
want to go there but in general I would
say we can talk about whether there are
in cognitive or the whether there are
benefits in terms of abilities and
skills and so on
related to bilingualism and
multilingualism and then there are
several studies for example showing that
on a very basic level neuroscientists
who look at how the brains look like
they take they take pictures of brains
they show that demonstrated that
bilingual use bilingualism can bring an
increase in the grey and white matter on
your brain so the stuff that surrounds
your your brain your cortex increases
has more volume if you learn a foreign
language
another example would be there are
studies showing that the bilinguals have
more control in the attention system
because of course whenever if you ask me
what's the name of this object the
monolingual would simply say chair but a
bilingual like me I would have in my
mind both words the word chair as well
as the word sadya which is the Italian
equivalent
and so my attention has to be active and
well-trained in order to suppress the
word Cydia and prevent that Italian to
come out and let the English word come
out so my attention system as a
bilingual is more trained than the
attention system of a monolingual so
that's also benefit there are other
benefits that's come up in older age
there are studies showing that
bilinguals are on average diagnosed with
dementia
five years later than monolinguals so
because your brain is better trained and
there are also other benefits social
benefits the ability to speak with
people you wouldn't be able to speak
with if you didn't speak the language
and then there is a strong correlation
between bilingualism or multilingualism
and creativity so a monolingual has
imagine imagine Lego the Lego bricks
okay
imagine you have a hundred bricks you
can come up only with a certain number
of new combinations you can build a
certain number of things a bilingual has
doubled the size of bricks has 200
bricks you know you have more material
to draw from so you can build and
combine bricks in more ways and you're
more likely to come up with creative
inventions better than a lingual that's
great thank you so much so now it's time
for questions from the audience so I
have fun here see junior on Instagram
asks wouldn't speaking the same language
destroy diversity or whole cultures
would we forget who we are does anyone
think can i chime in say we already do
all speak the same that is math but I
guess this is more of a human language
question I don't speak bats very well at
all
at all so I grew up in Germany and I did
maths in Germany and so even the words
that you're using for particular
conventions to me don't mean anything
immediately at all so I would say that
actually maths is a language like any
other that you have to learn and once
you've learnt it then you can use it in
you can use it with other people who
know that language so yeah I think it's
quite a complicated question what would
you say what we just had last weekend a
conference about multilingual identities
in the University of Reading organised
by our program creative multilingualism
and there we had examples of people with
a multilingual identity you know people
speaking different languages they have
multilingual identity I'm thinking about
my son he is thrilling he's three years
old and he's 3 lingual because I am
Italian and talk to him in Italian my
husband is American and speaks me my
child in English and then we spent two
years in the Netherlands because I was
working at the University of Amsterdam
and he was going at the daycare and
speaking Dutch all day and at some point
he thought he got it and he thought that
all women spoke Italian like mom all men
spoke English like that and all the kids
spoke Dutch but yeah I think his
identity is multilingual and so yeah
there are different types of identities
and there is a richer variety of course
if multilingualism and bilingual is
preserved great thank you so a certain
high school asked can we really say that
math is a language when it doesn't carry
meaning as other languages do you can't
write a letter in a mathematical and
scientific formula well I would as I was
sort of tried to explain in my my
example with Pythagoras theorem there's
so much information carried there and
that just contain letters they contain
a B and C so it some says it does
contain left as it does convey
information I guess having having heard
both of your sort of opinions on
language it's the issue I guess you're
facing where well that I'm facing I'm
trying to say that Matz is a language is
that it doesn't have that cultural
identity or as my own is just saying
that sort of multilingual identity that
comes from being part of different
cultures like you don't really get that
with max but then it all I think it all
comes down to how you define water
language is it's it all sort of comes
back to that first question that we all
tackled at the beginning and you know
from from my scientific point of view
the purpose of having a language is to
communicate information and I think
maths is the most succinct and concise
way of doing that and also in response
to your your point about having learn
different words and conventions doing
matter Germany completely agree about
video I've I've happened to teach maths
in Asia and again it's very different
but I think that when the formula is
written down on the page it's then much
clearer because the symbols are the same
so I would imagine you would have had a
plus sign you know if the number was
squared it was you know say was x
squared will be x with a little two
above it so there is the same written
symbols the same sort of basis there
which perhaps it's a bit different when
speaking I agree but I think I think
mass works as a written language
maybe I'll retract my original statement
it's a universal written language that's
great thank you so easy and grace via
email asked how would we decide what
language and how would it affect the
political state of the world what do you
think Marianna what what language should
we learn whatever shall we yeah I'm
assuming so so how we decide what
language to speak if we were just to
speaker 1:and how would it affect the
political state of the world we
shouldn't just speak one that's the
whole time
and you would I think you as human
beings overall we would be less creative
if we all spoke the same language it
would probably be more efficient in
business transactions and so on maybe
but we would be less creative because we
would have less variety and variety is
key to you know to combine things in
different way and come up with
innovative solutions you know progress
innovation it all comes from creativity
which comes from variability so another
aspect that actually I mean that it's a
very important question because the
question the question gonna power and
what we've been seeing over the last
well probably as far back as we can go
is that for instance lingua and I guess
it fundamentally it's a question of
lingua Franca's which extend across
groups and might extend across the whole
world and in the moment English is the
lingua franca that is accepted by most
people as useful but actually even I
mean there's then a question of what
English and people are now talking about
English is there are whole dictionaries
of English is Oxford University Press
produces Dictionary of English is
because in different parts of the world
people are then making it their own and
adapting it and changing it and recently
there's also been a lot of discussion
about China becoming much more powerful
now if we assume that we're very
comfortable actually here in the UK we
all speak English and that's all the
only language we need because actually
everybody speaks English and in future
probably all those other pesky languages
will disappear because everybody will be
converging on this one but actually if
China then becomes more powerful and
suddenly actually the UK's sort of
shrivels and becomes rather small and
insignificant and perhaps America
becomes less powerful so the u.s. is no
longer quite able to compete with China
then we're going to be absolutely
stuffed because we will only have
learned not only will we only know
English we will have only we will not
have the capability of a
putting two people speaking in other
ways and if you look at the whole
natural world it's very much to do with
those creatures that are most adaptable
come out they survive and the others
fall away so we might end up not able to
adapt anymore and I think learning
languages is very much about being
adaptable and learning to become
increasingly adaptable so we have a
question from alka who asks how
important is nonverbal language in
social interaction I think it's crucial
nonverbal language body language facial
expressions even interpersonal space is
crucial and again it's very much
influenced by your home culture so even
if we speak the same language but we use
our bodies or our gestures in different
ways then this can very much affect the
meaning that we won't come that we want
to convey with the words so it's crucial
it's also another dimension which is I
mean increasingly sign language has
become accepted as one of the languages
that we really need to be able to speak
or to use or to be able to use to
communicate so even the question of do
we speaker language is that perhaps
problematic to say that because there's
all sorts of different ways of using
languages so at the same conference that
Mariana was talking about we had a
performer who was partly telling us
about different types of sign language
that people speaking people use in
different parts of the UK there are
different sign languages in different
parts of the world and there you can see
that it's partly it may be
languages that are different because
they use a different grammar it might be
the same grammar as the country in which
there is also a spoken language it is an
equivalent or it might have its own
grammar but also it's very much using
gesture and facial expression as quite a
standardized mode of expression so a
gesture or a facial expression becomes a
word and there you can see that actually
you can communicate wholly through that
means and I think that the question of
sort of the multi modality of language
is that we've already touched on that it
might be visual to some extent it away
it's mental it can be vocal it can be
gesture we've got all these hugely
varied means of communicating and
animals do as well and if you think
about facial expression that can have a
whole whole text embodied in it I think
that different modalities of
communication or of expression might be
more effective at conveying some aspects
than others like some things are better
expressed by words some things are
better expressed by formulas some things
are better expressed by gestures you
know so yeah I think language taught
encompasses all of them really speaking
one spoken language all of them included
works very well okay Tom I think I'm
going to direct this question at you so
st. George's asked via Twitter is
language how we communicate our ideas or
does the language we speak influence or
even determine our thoughts well in
terms of maths that the ideas are the
same they are universal ideas so going
back to the example I gave about Isaac
Newton and his law of gravity that is
the same in every country around the
world
so it so there is no opportunity for
culture already or the spoken language
to influence how you interpret that
equation that's that's what it means you
know we can test it experimentally it's
a physical law and then not only on
earth but also across the universe so
sort of I really got the kind of words
of aliens and communication with with
other civilizations you know if we
wanted to communicate if we had a way of
communicating with with aliens with a
different civilization what would be the
best way of communicating with them
would it be to to send some of our music
would it be to send a piece of poetry
but then what language do you write the
poetry in and you know and if you're
doing music does it does it contain
words what culture does the music come
from whereas something like maths
something like the universal law of
gravity that holds everywhere in the
universe is possibly the best way of
communication because it is that
fundamental idea that cannot be
influenced from from anything else you
know it's gravity is there it's a force
it exists it has no way of being
modified by by culture by language by by
anything great thank you
thank you so much for your ideas and
opinions now it is time to vote so in
order to vote you need to go to explored
org slash life - dream - vote and follow
the instructions in order to cast your
vote we'll then tally all of those up
and announce the results tomorrow
afternoon on all of the social media
platforms so while you're giving us your
opinion it's time for the panel here to
tell me what they think about would it
be better if we all spoke the same
language yes my answer would be no
definitely um you wouldn't be better
because as I said I think we would be on
average less
we would be less innovative like a
recent study published by the European
Union suggested that knowing a foreign
language can increase your wages by
between fifty fifteen and twenty percent
something like that so why giving the
other way there are too many pros too
many positive benefits of keeping this
variability and actually learning
foreign languages I'm gonna say that I
don't I think the question is immaterial
because ultimately in my opinion we
ultimately already do speak the same
language and that is the one of maths
again if you think about the most
fundamental way of communication was
fundamental building blocks of the
universe they are all communicated via
equations by a maths and so in my
opinion we already do have that and then
sort of the human languages and the
spoken language is that we've been
talking about they're sort of added on
top of that as extra layers but I think
sort of the absolute foundation of the
way to communicate is through maths and
science so I think we already do speak
the same so I think you've just in a way
proved that by speaking in English about
maths which some of which I understand
some of which most of which I don't but
we need languages for different purposes
that it makes a lot of sense to have
languages for different purposes animals
seem to do that I think it's actually
inconceivable that we would all speak
the same language because really what
you get then is kind of a whole bunch of
robots that always speak exactly the
same language that never changes I don't
think I would want to live in a world of
robots and that one thing that's
intrigued me is that
in the UK in Wales people in Wales had
their universal language on a plate in a
sense that's English you don't really
need to go beyond the UK if you don't
want to stay with that so you could
speak English and you could never go
beyond English but actually there was
then a movement to create schools where
the first language would be Welsh
completely impractical but actually very
successful and I think a great
initiative and one of the reasons was
because otherwise you completely lose
touch with your heritage and I think
that's a hugely important reason why
people want to learn languages is to be
back in touch with their heritage and I
think in the UK a lot of children want
to learn languages because they want to
find out about what they want to be able
to communicate with their grandmother or
so on in Oxford for instance we have
some schools have six 60 70 different
languages and it would be terrible to
lose those because actually each one of
those is tremendously valuable in
getting back into of keeping in touch
with your family with your ancestors and
also looking forward with many countries
where those languages are then spoken
and open up our world to those countries
so I think that's a huge huge hugely
valuable and huge kind of richness that
we have I agree with you as well I think
languages are very very important I
think they're key in culture and
discovering other people's culture is
very it's something that we love to do
we love to travel we love to go on
holiday and as well as that also you're
speaking about heritage I think that as
well as very important and we'll just to
understand sort of where you come from
and there are certain things that can be
only expressed in some languages so as a
student studying Spanish and also
knowing English there are some things
that we just don't have words for an
English but you do have Spanish so I
think languages in that sense they're
very important to keep and that
variation between different languages
is also it's very vital I think so it's
almost time for us to go but you can
keep on entering the prize drawer until
tomorrow morning at 11:00 a.m. we'll get
in touch with the winners and we'll also
give the results from the vote on all of
the social media platforms tomorrow
afternoon if you've enjoyed this find
more questions like this at Explorer org
and register for updates and more
features or follow us on all of the
social media platforms thank you to the
panel for all of your opinions and thank
you to you for your questions and for
taking part our next live stream event
will be on Facebook live on Friday 16th
of March and we'll hope to see some of
you again thank you
[Music]